[REP-2014] Benchmarking performance in ROS 2 (#364)
ros-infrastructure/rep: rep-2014.rst

- `ros2_latency_evaluation <https://github.com/Barkhausen-Institut/ros2_latency_evaluation/>`_: A tool to benchmarking performance of a ROS 2 Node system in separate processses (initially focused on both inter-process and intra-process interactions, later focused). Forked from `ros2-performance`.
- `ros2_timer_latency_measurement <https://github.com/hsgwa/ros2_timer_latency_measurement/>`_:  A minimal *real-time safe* testing utility for measuring jitter and latency.  Measures nanosleep latency between ROS child threads and latency of timer callbacks (also within ROS) across two different Linux kernel setups (`vanilla` and a `RT_PREEMPT`` patched kernel).
- `buildfarm_perf_tests <https://github.com/ros2/buildfarm_perf_tests/>`_: Tests which run regularly on the official ROS 2 buildfarm. Formally, extends `performance_test` with additional tests that measure additional metrics including CPU usage, memory, resident anonymous memory or virtual memory.

> - `ros-tracing <https://gitlab.com/ros-tracing/>`_: Tracing tools for ROS 2 built upon LTTng which allow collecting runtime execution information on real-time distributed systems, using the low-overhead LTTng tracer. Performance evaluation can be scripted out of the data collected from all these trace points. The ROS 2 core layers (rmw, rcl, rclcpp) have been instrumented with LTTng probes which allow collecting information of ROS 2 targets without the need to modify the ROS 2 core code (*system under test)*. There various publications available about *ros-tracing*  [3]_ [4]_ and it is used actively to benchmark ROS 2 in real scenarios including perception and mapping [5]_, hardware acceleration [6]_ [7]_ or self-driving mobility [8]_.

Reviewer: @vmayoral FYI `ros2_tracing` moved to GitHub: https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing

Author: @christophebedard thanks a lot. See 4b98c34e50b0599bf7bc26206ced5a722acc1d5c. Feel free to send a suggestion if you spot anything like this and/or have any suggestion. I'd love to have your views on this and wouldn't mind co-authoring it together.

REP: 2014
Title: Benchmarking performance in ROS 2
Author: Víctor Mayoral-Vilches <victor@accelerationrobotics.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-Sept-2022
Post-History: 11-Oct-2022

Abstract
========

This REP describes some principles and guidelines for benchmarking performance in ROS 2.

> Motivation

Author: Meaning we shouldn't have this section? I've bumped into plenty of folks over the last few years who disregarded actual data and were _moved_ more by marketing messages (and outreach capability). 

I think its important we set some principles on why this is important *technically* in a field like robotics. Maybe obvious to some, but helpful to many?

The myriad combinations of robot hardware and robotics software make assessing robotic-system performance in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner challenging. This REP attempts to provide some guidelines to help robotists benchmark their systems in a consistent and reproducible manner by following a quantitative approach. This REP also provides a set of tools and examples to help guide robotists while collecting and reporting performance data.

Value for stakeholders:

- Package maintainers can use these guidelines to integrate performance benchmarking data in their packages.

- Consumers can use the guidelines in the REP to benchmark ROS Nodes and Graphs in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, as well as the corresponding performance data offered in ROS packages to set expectations on the capabilities of each.

> - Hardware vendors and robot manufacturers can use these guidelines to show evidence of the performance of their systems solutions with ROS in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner.

Author: > That seems like a pretty broad audience. "Benchmarking" a whole robot seems very different than benchmarking a specific package.

I agree, it's broad, but also think that we need to set some expectations and believe each one of these groups can benefit from it. I'd say that my intention while writing this was to hint that the main intended audience is:

- Package maintainers (`maintainers`)
- People who use ROS packages (`consumers`)
- Hardware manufacturers and vendors (of all sorts, including sensors, actuators, but also compute solutions, e.g. accelerators, `Hardware vendors and robot manufacturers`)

Is there any of these groups you'd suggest removing @sloretz?

The guidelines in here are intended to be a living document that can be updated as new information becomes available.

A quantitative approach
-----------------------

> Performance must be studied with real examples and measurements on real robotic computations, rather than simply as a collection of definitions, designs and/or marketing actions. The quantitative approach [1]_ to robotics systems architecture fits well in this context and helps robotic architects come up with better performing architectures through an empirical strategy.

Author: I like this suggestion. Would you like to make a suggestion out of it @sloretz or should i just pick it?

> Performance must be studied with real examples and measurements on real robotic computations, rather than simply as a collection of definitions, designs and/or marketing actions. The quantitative approach [1]_ to robotics systems architecture fits well in this context and helps robotic architects come up with better performing architectures through an empirical strategy.

Author: Made an attempt myself to integrate your input @sloretz. Let me know if you still think this needs further improvements:

```suggestion
Performance must be studied with real examples and measurements on real robotic computations, rather than simply as a collection of definitions, designs and/or marketing actions. When creating benchmarks, prefer to use realistic data and situations rather than data designed to test one edge case. Follow the quantitative approach [1]_ when designing your architecture.
```

    |  + +  +  +  |                     |  |    Application        | |
    +--|-|--|--|--+---------------+     |  |                   <------------+ Probe
    |  | |  |  |                  |     |  +-----------------------+ |
    |  v v  v  v                  |     |                            |
    |     Probes                  |     |                      <------------+ Probe
    |                             |     |                            |
    |       System under test     |     |   System under test        |
    |                             |     |                      <------------+ Probe
    |                             |     |                            |
    |                             |     |                            |
    +-----------------------------+     +----------------------------+

             Black-Box                            Grey-box

Tracing and benchmarking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tracing and benchmarking can be defined as follows:

- `tracing`: a technique used to understand what goes on in a running software system.

- `benchmarking`: a method of comparing the performance of various systems by running a common test.

> From these definitions, inherently one can determine that both benchmarking and tracing are connected in the sense that the test/benchmark will use a series of measurements for comparison. These measurements will come from tracing probes. In other words, tracing will collect data that will then be fed into a benchmark program for comparison.

Reviewer 2: The definition of tracing that is given above is so broad that it encompasses any kind of procedure "used to understand what goes on in a running software system".  I haven't seen such a broad definition before, usually, tracing is defined as logging (partial) execution information while the system is running. Common usage is that these probes try to be very low overhead and log only information available directly at the tracepoint. This more narrow definition of tracing would not encompass all kinds of performance data capture I could envision (for example, another common approach is to compute internal statistics and make them available in various ways).

Unless it is really intended to restrict data capture to tracing, which would need a justification, I would suggest using the more common, narrow definition of the term in the definition section, and then edit this paragraph to encompass diverse methods of capturing data.

> From these definitions, inherently one can determine that both benchmarking and tracing are connected in the sense that the test/benchmark will use a series of measurements for comparison. These measurements will come from tracing probes. In other words, tracing will collect data that will then be fed into a benchmark program for comparison.

Author: @sloretz and @iluetkeb, see fa942f9c8f98c889bf97f22d5fa8e04b815d569e. Let me know if that addresses your concerns or if you'd like further changes. Feel free to suggest them if appropriate.

> From these definitions, inherently one can determine that both benchmarking and tracing are connected in the sense that the test/benchmark will use a series of measurements for comparison. These measurements will come from tracing probes. In other words, tracing will collect data that will then be fed into a benchmark program for comparison.

Reviewer: I agree with @iluetkeb. I usually mention something like "fast/low-overhead, low-level logging ..."

@vmayoral I'd explicitly add "low-overhead, low-level" before "logging ..." just to make sure people don't get it mixed up with typical user-comprehensible string logging.

> Prior work

Reviewer 3: This seems like it could be in an appendix.

Author: Happy to consider moving it to the appendix if you can make a contribution around it @sloretz but as is, it's going to be a significant amount of work to re-structure the document to remain coherent while moving this to the appendix.

Also, I personally think/feel this topic is important enough to give it priority in here (lots of people re-inventing the wheel benchmarking-wise. Bringing past work to their attention early in this document is sound IMHO).

----------
There're various past efforts in the robotics community to benchmark ROS robotic systems. The following are some of the most representative ones:

- `ros2_benchmarking <https://github.com/piappl/ros2_benchmarking/>`_ : First implementation available for ROS 2, aimed to provide a framework to compare ROS and ROS 2 communications.

> - `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test/>`_: Tool is designed to measure inter and intra-process communications. Runs at least one publisher and at least one subscriber, each one in one independent thread or process and records different performance metrics. It also provides a way to generate a report with the results through a different package.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test/>`_: Tool is designed to measure inter and intra-process communications. Runs at least one publisher and at least one subscriber, each one in one independent thread or process and records different performance metrics. It also provides a way to generate a report with the results through a different package.
- `reference_system <https://github.com/ros-realtime/reference-system/>` _: Tool designed to provide a framework for creating reference systems that can represent real-world distributed systems in order to more fairly compare various configurations of each system (e.g. measuring performance of different ROS 2 executors). It also provides a way to generate reports as well.
```

Author: Good one @flynneva!

- `ros2_latency_evaluation <https://github.com/Barkhausen-Institut/ros2_latency_evaluation/>`_: A tool to benchmarking performance of a ROS 2 Node system in separate processses (initially focused on both inter-process and intra-process interactions, later focused). Forked from `ros2-performance`.
- `ros2_timer_latency_measurement <https://github.com/hsgwa/ros2_timer_latency_measurement/>`_:  A minimal *real-time safe* testing utility for measuring jitter and latency.  Measures nanosleep latency between ROS child threads and latency of timer callbacks (also within ROS) across two different Linux kernel setups (`vanilla` and a `RT_PREEMPT`` patched kernel).
- `buildfarm_perf_tests <https://github.com/ros2/buildfarm_perf_tests/>`_: Tests which run regularly on the official ROS 2 buildfarm. Formally, extends `performance_test` with additional tests that measure additional metrics including CPU usage, memory, resident anonymous memory or virtual memory.

> - `ros-tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_: Tracing tools for ROS 2 built upon LTTng which allow collecting runtime execution information on real-time distributed systems, using the low-overhead LTTng tracer. Performance evaluation can be scripted out of the data collected from all these trace points. The ROS 2 core layers (rmw, rcl, rclcpp) have been instrumented with LTTng probes which allow collecting information of ROS 2 targets without the need to modify the ROS 2 core code (*system under test)*. There various publications available about *ros-tracing*  [3]_ [4]_ and it is used actively to benchmark ROS 2 in real scenarios including perception and mapping [5]_, hardware acceleration [6]_ [7]_ or self-driving mobility [8]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_: Tracing tools for ROS 2 built upon LTTng which allow collecting runtime execution information on real-time distributed systems, using the low-overhead LTTng tracer. Performance evaluation can be scripted out of the data collected from all these trace points. The ROS 2 core layers (rmw, rcl, rclcpp) have been instrumented with LTTng probes which allow collecting information of ROS 2 targets without the need to modify the ROS 2 core code (*system under test)*. There various publications available about *ros-tracing*  [3]_ [4]_ and it is used actively to benchmark ROS 2 in real scenarios including perception and mapping [5]_, hardware acceleration [6]_ [7]_ or self-driving mobility [8]_.
```

When looking at other related areas to robotics we find the MLPerf Inference and MLCommons initiatives which are the closest to what we are trying to achieve in ROS 2. The MLPerf Inference is an open source project that aims to define a common set of benchmarks for evaluating the performance of machine learning inference engines. The MLCommons is an open source project that aims to define a common set of benchmarks for evaluating the performance of machine learning models. Both projects have been very successful and are widely used in the industry. The MLPerf Inference project has been completed in 2021 and the results inference benchmarks available in [10]_. The MLCommons project has become an industry standard in Machine Learning and the results publicly disclosed in [11]_.

Performance metrics in robotics
===============================
Robots are deterministic machines and their performance should be understood by considering metrics like the following ones:

> - **latency**: time between the start and the completion of a task.

Reviewer 2: I second that. While these general terms are very encompassing and applicable in a variety of contexts, adding more specific metrics could help ensure that people are really talking about the same thing.

> - **latency**: time between the start and the completion of a task.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **latency**: time between the start and the completion of a task.
- **system reaction time**: time between receipt of an external stimulus and the beginning of the system's actions (for example, time between an obstacle sensor firing and the first velocity command taking this into account)
- **software system reaction time**: time between when an external stimulus is received by the robot's software and when the corresponding action has been executed by the software. This is usually the more directly measurable version of system reaction time.
- **message latency**: Time between publishing a message and invocation of the corresponding callback on the receiver side
- **execution latency**: Time between when an event leading to an execution (such as a timer firing, or a message being received) occurs, and when the corresponding callback is called
```

Author: Thanks for this @iluetkeb.

> - **latency**: time between the start and the completion of a task.

Author: See 7f8e848aafd079864f2cc7b87e0818f4a6304f99.

- **bandwidth or throughput**: the total amount of work done in a given time for a task.

- **power**: the electrical energy per unit of time consumed while executing a given task.

- **performance-per-watt**: total amount of work (generally *bandwidth* or *throughput*) that can be delivered for every watt of power consumed.

- **memory**: the amount of short-term data (not to be confused with storage) required while executing a given task.

These metrics can help determine performance characteristics of a robotic system. Of most relevance for robotic systems we often encounter the *real-time* and *determinism* characteristics defined as follows: 

- **real-time**: ability of completing a task's computations while meeting time deadlines

> - **determinsm**: that a task happens in exactly the same timeframe, each time.

Reviewer 2: I think I understand what you mean, but "happens in exactly the same timeframe" may not be easily interpretable by people not already familiar with the concept of determinism.

> - **determinsm**: that a task happens in exactly the same timeframe, each time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **determinism**: that the same external or internal event leads to the same system behavior, with executions in the same order, each time.
```

In another example, a robotic system that can perform a task in 1 second with a power consumption of `2W` is twice as fast (*latency*) as another robotic system that can perform the same task in 2 seconds with a power consumption of `0.5W`. However, the second robotic system is twice as efficient as the first one. In this case, the solution that requires less power would be the best option from an energy efficiency perspective (with a higher *performance-per-watt*). Similarly, a robotic system that has a high bandwidth but consumes a lot of energy might not be the best option for a mobile robot that must operate for a long time on a battery.

Therefore, it is important to consider different of these metrics when benchmarking a robotic system. The metrics presented in this REP are intended to be used as a guideline, and should be adapted to the specific needs of a robot.

Methodology for benchmarking performance in ROS 2
=================================================

> In this REP, we **recommend adopting a grey-box and non-functional benchmarking approach** to measure performance and allow to evaluate ROS 2 individual nodes as well as complete computational graphs. To realize it in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, we also recommend using the Linux Tracing Toolkit next generation (`LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_) through the `ros-tracing` project, which leverages probes already inserted in the ROS 2 core layers and tools to facilitate benchmarking ROS 2 abstractions.

Reviewer 3: This section seems to be the most important part of the REP. I'd recommend moving this to the top. I also recommend removing any definitions not used here.

Author: I agree about the importance but struggle to see how this could help a non-experienced person (into the topic). This paragraph leverages prior definitions including what's *benchmarking*, *grey-box* and *non-functional* approaches to it. Without properly defining these things, understanding things properly might be very hard.

We somewhat bumped into such scenario at https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2/pull/2788 wherein after a few interactions, even for experienced ROS developers, it became somewhat clear to me (due to the lack of familiary with this approach) that the value of benchmarking things with this approach wasn't being understood properly. Lots of unnecesary demands were set because the approach was simply not understood, to later take a much less rigorous approach to benchmark the nav stack. In my experience the topics introduced in here are hard to digest and require proper context.

Maybe a compromise would be to grab these bits and rewrite them without introducing too much terminology in the abstract of the REP? @sloretz feel free to make a suggestion.

> In this REP, we **recommend adopting a grey-box and non-functional benchmarking approach** to measure performance and allow to evaluate ROS 2 individual nodes as well as complete computational graphs. To realize it in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, we also recommend using the Linux Tracing Toolkit next generation (`LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_) through the `ros-tracing` project, which leverages probes already inserted in the ROS 2 core layers and tools to facilitate benchmarking ROS 2 abstractions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this REP, we **recommend adopting a grey-box and non-functional benchmarking approach** to measure performance and allow to evaluate ROS 2 individual nodes as well as complete computational graphs. To realize it in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, we also recommend using the Linux Tracing Toolkit next generation (`LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_) through the `ros2_tracing` project, which leverages probes already inserted in the ROS 2 core layers and tools to facilitate benchmarking ROS 2 abstractions.
```

The following diagram shows the proposed methodology for benchmarking performance in ROS 2 which consists of 3 steps:

::

                                                                
                                                +--------------+
                    +----------------+  rebuild |              |
                    |                +---------->              |
  start  +----------> 1. trace graph |          | 2. benchmark +----------> 3. report
                    |                |          |              |
                    +----+------^--^-+          |              |
                         |      |  |            +-------+------+
                         |      |  |                    |
                         +------+  |                    |
                           LTTng   +--------------------+
                                       re-instrument

1. instrument both the target ROS 2 abstraction/application using `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_. Refer to `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ for tools, documentation and ROS 2 core layers tracepoints;

> 2. trace and benchmark the ROS 2 application;

Reviewer 3: I think this would be a good place for technical details. Current C/C++ benchmarks in ROS 2 use Google Benchmark, and are skipped unless `AMENT_RUN_PERFORMANCE_TESTS` is explicitly set.

Value for stakeholders:

- Package maintainers can use these guidelines to integrate performance benchmarking tools (e.g. instrumentation) and data (e.g. results, plots and datasets) in their packages.

- Consumers can use the guidelines in the REP to benchmark ROS Nodes and Graphs in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, as well as the corresponding performance data offered in ROS packages to set expectations on the capabilities of each.

- Hardware vendors and robot manufacturers can use these guidelines to show evidence of the performance of their systems solutions with ROS in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner.

The guidelines in here are intended to be a living document that can be updated as new information becomes available.

Tracing and benchmarking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tracing and benchmarking can be defined as follows:

> - `tracing`: logging (partial) execution information while the system is running. `tracing` is used to understand what goes on in a running software system. 

Reviewer 5: Do we have scope for distributed system with this REP? It looks this PR is only for localhost system?

```suggestion
- `tracing`: logging (partial) execution information while the system is running. `tracing` is used to understand what goes on in running software systems. 
```

- `benchmarking`: a method of comparing the performance of various systems by running a common test.

From these definitions, inherently one can determine that both benchmarking and tracing are connected in the sense that the test/benchmark will use a series of measurements for comparison. These measurements will come from tracing probes or other logging mechanisms. In other words, tracing will collect data that will then be fed into a benchmark program for comparison.

> A quantitative approach
> -----------------------

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

A quantitative approach
-----------------------
```

Performance must be studied with real examples and measurements on real robotic computations, rather than simply as a collection of definitions, designs and/or marketing actions. When creating benchmarks, prefer to use realistic data and situations rather than data designed to test one edge case. Follow the quantitative approach [1]_ when designing your architecture.

Approaches to benchmark performance
-----------------------------------
There're different types of benchmarking approaches, specially when related to performance. The following definitions clarify the most popular terms inspired by [2]_:

- `Functional performance testing`: Functional performance is the measurable performance of the system’s functions which the user can experience. For example, in a motion planning algorithm, measures could include items like the ratio the algorithm gets the motion plan right.
  
- `Non-functional performance testing`: The measurable performance of those aspects that don't belong to the system's functions. In the motion planning example, the latency the planner, the memory consumption, the CPU usage, etc.

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

REP: 2014
Title: Benchmarking performance in ROS 2
Author: Víctor Mayoral-Vilches <victor@accelerationrobotics.com>, Ingo Lütkebohle <Ingo.Luetkebohle@de.bosch.com>, Christophe Bédard <bedard.christophe@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-Sept-2022
Post-History: 05-Nov-2022

Abstract
========

This REP describes some principles and guidelines for benchmarking performance in ROS 2.

Motivation
==========

> Benchmarking is the act of running a computer program with a known workload to assess the program's relative performance. In the context of ROS 2, performance information can help roboticists design more efficient robotic systems and select the right hardware for their robotic application. It can also help understand the trade-offs between different algorithms that implement the same capability, and help them choose the best approach for their use case. Performance data can also be used to compare different versions of ROS 2 and to identify regressions. Finally, performance information can be used to help prioritize future development efforts.

Reviewer 6: One general point: Each sentence should have its own line. It makes it easier to give feedback, and it makes the diff smaller in future revisions.

Author: Noted, we'll look into this in the next iteration of reviews.

The myriad combinations of robot hardware and robotics software make assessing robotic-system performance in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner challenging. This REP attempts to provide some guidelines to help robotists benchmark their systems in a consistent and reproducible manner by following a quantitative approach. This REP also provides a set of tools and examples to help guide robotists while collecting and reporting performance data.

Value for stakeholders:

> - Package maintainers can use these guidelines to integrate performance benchmarking data in their packages.

Author: Makes sense to me. Thanks for the input. Re-iterated below based on it:

```suggestion
- Package maintainers can use these guidelines to integrate performance benchmarking tools (e.g. instrumentation) and data (e.g. results, plots and datasets) in their packages.
```

- Consumers can use the guidelines in the REP to benchmark ROS Nodes and Graphs in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, as well as the corresponding performance data offered in ROS packages to set expectations on the capabilities of each.

- Hardware vendors and robot manufacturers can use these guidelines to show evidence of the performance of their systems solutions with ROS in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner.

The guidelines in here are intended to be a living document that can be updated as new information becomes available.

> 

Reviewer 7: moving the tracing and benchmarking definitions earlier in the document 
```suggestion
Tracing and benchmarking
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Tracing and benchmarking can be defined as follows:

- `tracing`: logging (partial) execution information while the system is running. `tracing` is used to understand what goes on in a running software system. 

- `benchmarking`: a method of comparing the performance of various systems by running a common test.

From these definitions, inherently one can determine that both benchmarking and tracing are connected in the sense that the test/benchmark will use a series of measurements for comparison. These measurements will come from tracing probes or other logging mechanisms. In other words, tracing will collect data that will then be fed into a benchmark program for comparison.
```

A quantitative approach
-----------------------
Performance must be studied with real examples and measurements on real robotic computations, rather than simply as a collection of definitions, designs and/or marketing actions. When creating benchmarks, prefer to use realistic data and situations rather than data designed to test one edge case. Follow the quantitative approach [1]_ when designing your architecture.

Approaches to benchmark performance
-----------------------------------
There're different types of benchmarking approaches, specially when related to performance. The following definitions clarify the most popular terms inspired by [2]_:

- `Functional performance testing`: Functional performance is the measurable performance of the system’s functions which the user can experience. For example, in a motion planning algorithm, measures could include items like the ratio the algorithm gets the motion plan right.
  
- `Non-functional performance testing`: The measurable performance of those aspects that don't belong to the system's functions. In the motion planning example, the latency the planner, the memory consumption, the CPU usage, etc.

> - `Black-box performance testing`: Measures performance by eliminating the layers above the *layer-of-interest* and replacing those with a specific test application that stimulates the layer-of-interest in the way you need it. This allows to gather the measurement data right inside your specific test application. The acquisition of the data (the probe) resides inside the test application. A major design constraint in such a test is that you have to eliminate the “application” in order to test the system. Otherwise, the real application and the test application would likely interfere.

Reviewer 8: I think this name "black box test" is a little bit inaccurate. If the text is correct and only layers above should be eliminated maybe a more accurate name would be integration test. Meaning that the goal of the test is to measure how one layer interact with others or with the test application. Maybe the focus should be moved to the impossibility to access the internal state of the system.

Author: See https://drive.google.com/file/d/15nX80RK6aS8abZvQAOnMNUEgh7px9V5S/view for past references to black box tests.

    +-----------------------------+     +-----------------------------+

              Functional                            Non-functional

    +-------------+                     +----------------------------+
    | Test App.   |                     |  +-----------------------+ |
    |  + +  +  +  |                     |  |    Application        | |
    +--|-|--|--|--+---------------+     |  |                   <------------+ Probe
    |  | |  |  |                  |     |  +-----------------------+ |
    |  v v  v  v                  |     |                            |
    |     Probes                  |     |                      <------------+ Probe
    |                             |     |                            |
    |       System under test     |     |   System under test        |
    |                             |     |                      <------------+ Probe
    |                             |     |                            |
    |                             |     |                            |
    +-----------------------------+     +----------------------------+

             Black-Box                            Grey-box

> Tracing and benchmarking
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
> 
> Tracing and benchmarking can be defined as follows:
> 
> - `tracing`: logging (partial) execution information while the system is running. `tracing` is used to understand what goes on in a running software system. 
> 
> - `benchmarking`: a method of comparing the performance of various systems by running a common test.
> 
> From these definitions, inherently one can determine that both benchmarking and tracing are connected in the sense that the test/benchmark will use a series of measurements for comparison. These measurements will come from tracing probes or other logging mechanisms. In other words, tracing will collect data that will then be fed into a benchmark program for comparison.

Reviewer 7: moving the tracing and benchmarking definitions earlier in the document 
```suggestion

```

Prior work
----------
There're various past efforts in the robotics community to benchmark ROS robotic systems. The following are some of the most representative ones:

- `ros2_benchmarking <https://github.com/piappl/ros2_benchmarking/>`_ : First implementation available for ROS 2, aimed to provide a framework to compare ROS and ROS 2 communications.
- `performance_test <https://gitlab.com/ApexAI/performance_test/>`_: Tool is designed to measure inter and intra-process communications. Runs at least one publisher and at least one subscriber, each one in one independent thread or process and records different performance metrics. It also provides a way to generate a report with the results through a different package.

> - `reference_system <https://github.com/ros-realtime/reference-system/>` _: Tool designed to provide a framework for creating reference systems that can represent real-world distributed systems in order to more fairly compare various configurations of each system (e.g. measuring performance of different ROS 2 executors). It also provides a way to generate reports as well.

Author: ```suggestion
- `reference_system <https://github.com/ros-realtime/reference-system/>`_: Tool designed to provide a framework for creating reference systems that can represent real-world distributed systems in order to more fairly compare various configurations of each system (e.g. measuring performance of different ROS 2 executors). It also provides a way to generate reports as well.
```

Fix typo in the URL.

When looking at other related areas to robotics we find the MLPerf Inference and MLCommons initiatives which are the closest to what we are trying to achieve in ROS 2. The MLPerf Inference is an open source project that aims to define a common set of benchmarks for evaluating the performance of machine learning inference engines. The MLCommons is an open source project that aims to define a common set of benchmarks for evaluating the performance of machine learning models. Both projects have been very successful and are widely used in the industry. The MLPerf Inference project has been completed in 2021 and the results inference benchmarks available in [10]_. The MLCommons project has become an industry standard in Machine Learning and the results publicly disclosed in [11]_.

Performance metrics in robotics
===============================

> Robots are deterministic machines and their performance should be understood by considering metrics like the following ones:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Robots are deterministic machines and their performance should be understood by considering metrics such as the following:
```

                                                                
                                                +--------------+
                    +----------------+  rebuild |              |
                    |                +---------->              |
  start  +----------> 1. trace graph |          | 2. benchmark +----------> 3. report
                    |                |          |              |
                    +----+------^--^-+          |              |
                         |      |  |            +-------+------+
                         |      |  |                    |
                         +------+  |                    |
                           LTTng   +--------------------+
                                       re-instrument

1. instrument both the target ROS 2 abstraction/application using `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_. Refer to `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ for tools, documentation and ROS 2 core layers tracepoints;
2. trace and benchmark the ROS 2 application;
3. create performance reports with the results of the benchmarking.

Reference implementation and recommendations
============================================

> The reader is referred to `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ and `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_ to familiarize herself with the tools and the methodology of collecting and analyzing performance data. In addition, [3]_ and [4]_ present comprehensive descriptions of the `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ tools and the `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_ infrastructure.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The reader is referred to `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ and `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_ to familiarize themselves with the tools and the methodology of collecting and analyzing performance data. In addition, [3]_ and [4]_ present comprehensive descriptions of the `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ tools and the `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_ infrastructure.
```

> Reference implementations complying with the recommendations of this REP can be found in literature for applications like perception and mapping [5]_, hardware acceleration [6]_ [7]_ or self-driving mobility [8]_. A particular example of interest for the reader is the instrumentation of the `image_pipeline <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/tree/humble/>`_ ROS 2 package [12]_, which is a set of nodes for processing image data in ROS 2. The `image_pipeline <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/tree/humble/>`_ package has been instrumented with LTTng probes available in the ROS 2 `Humble` release, which results in various perception Components (e.g. `RectifyNode <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/blob/ros2/image_proc/src/rectify.cpp#L82/>`_ *Component*) leveraging intrumentation which if enabled, can help trace the computational graph information flow of a ROS 2 application using such Component. The results of benchmarking the performance of `image_pipeline <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/tree/humble/>`_ are available in [13]_ and launch scripts to both trace and analyze perception graphs available in [14]_.

Reviewer: @vmayoral as [I mentioned on Discourse](https://discourse.ros.org/t/rep-2014-rfc-benchmarking-performance-in-ros-2/27770/14), we could perhaps add a sentence to mention use-cases like heterogeneous systems and mention that `ros2_tracing` is probably not the _only_ tool that would be used.

Author: I'm think we can relax a bit the language in here and point to tracing in general, while mentioning `ros2_tracing` as one example that's already integrated in ROS 2.

REP: 2014
Title: Benchmarking performance in ROS 2
Author: Víctor Mayoral-Vilches <victor@accelerationrobotics.com>, Ingo Lütkebohle <Ingo.Luetkebohle@de.bosch.com>, Christophe Bédard <bedard.christophe@gmail.com>, Rayza Araújo <araujorayza@gmail.com> 
Status: Draft

> Type: Informational

Reviewer: This is how the headers of all REPs are laid out. GitHub's rendering just doesn't really work, but rendering on https://www.ros.org/reps/ should look good, like all other REPs.

Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-Sept-2022
Post-History: 15-June-2023

Abstract
========

> This REP describes some principles and guidelines for benchmarking performance in ROS 2.

Author: It's clearly specified at the top. See https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/pull/364/files#diff-26ca1241a786a8a285a3dc326474f69a9b971c06eab2db73c0ddd53f8a74ae1cR5. Past work is detailed below.

Value for stakeholders:

- Package maintainers can use these guidelines to integrate performance benchmarking tools (e.g. instrumentation) and data (e.g. results, plots and datasets) in their packages.

- Consumers can use the guidelines in the REP to benchmark ROS Nodes and Graphs in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, as well as the corresponding performance data offered in ROS packages to set expectations on the capabilities of each.

- Hardware vendors and robot manufacturers can use these guidelines to show evidence of the performance of their systems solutions with ROS in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner.

The guidelines in here are intended to be a living document that can be updated as new information becomes available.

A quantitative approach
-----------------------

> Performance must be studied with real examples and measurements on real robotic computations, rather than simply as a collection of definitions, designs and/or marketing actions. When creating benchmarks, prefer to use realistic data and situations rather than data designed to test one edge case. Follow the quantitative approach [1]_ when designing your architecture.

Reviewer 9: Could you elaborate on this comparison? It makes sense to study performance with real examples and measurements. Could you clarify what this is recommending _against_? What does it mean to study performance as a collection of definitions, designs, and/or marketing actions?

In another example, a robotic system that can perform a task in 1 second with a power consumption of `2W` is twice as fast (*latency*) as another robotic system that can perform the same task in 2 seconds with a power consumption of `0.5W`. However, the second robotic system is twice as efficient as the first one. In this case, the solution that requires less power would be the best option from an energy efficiency perspective (with a higher *performance-per-watt*). Similarly, a robotic system that has a high bandwidth but consumes a lot of energy might not be the best option for a mobile robot that must operate for a long time on a battery.

Therefore, it is important to consider different of these metrics when benchmarking a robotic system. The metrics presented in this REP are intended to be used as a guideline, and should be adapted to the specific needs of a robot.

Methodology for benchmarking performance in ROS 2
=================================================

> In this REP, we **recommend adopting a grey-box and non-functional benchmarking approach** to measure performance and allow to evaluate ROS 2 individual nodes as well as complete computational graphs. To realize it in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, we also recommend using the Linux Tracing Toolkit next generation (`LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_) through the `ros2_tracing` project, which leverages probes already inserted in the ROS 2 core layers and tools to facilitate benchmarking ROS 2 abstractions.

Reviewer 9: > ... benchmarking ROS 2 abstractions.

What does it mean to benchmark a ROS 2 abstractions? Should this instead be "applications" ?

> In this REP, we **recommend adopting a grey-box and non-functional benchmarking approach** to measure performance and allow to evaluate ROS 2 individual nodes as well as complete computational graphs. To realize it in an architecture-neutral, representative, and reproducible manner, we also recommend using the Linux Tracing Toolkit next generation (`LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_) through the `ros2_tracing` project, which leverages probes already inserted in the ROS 2 core layers and tools to facilitate benchmarking ROS 2 abstractions.

Reviewer 10: There is a lot of lead up to this section, which I think is important, but this is the "meat" of the rep. I think it might be helpful to make this section more self contained and explicitly state what is meant by `gray-box` and `non-functional.`

Personally, I don't find these definitions particularly clear:

`"Grey-box performance testing: More application-specific measure which is capable of watching internal states of the system and can measure (probe) certain points in the system, thus generate the measurement data with minimal interference. Requires to instrument the complete application."`

Just to clarify, gray box here means the code is instrumented at compile time with an external tracer as opposed to say, just creating a time object and measuring the elapsed time? 

`Non-functional performance testing: The measurable performance of those aspects that don't belong to the system's functions. In the motion planning example, the latency the planner, the memory consumption, the CPU usage, etc.`

Just to clarify this section, do we mean that tests should be "end-to-end", as in from the time from when a "function" is called until it returns? This would be in contrast to say measuring every sub-routine of a "function" and only evaluating the "meaty" part of the system. 

Since this is a recommendation to the community, many of whom are not experts in this sub-domain, we need to be clear, plain-spoken, and direct with our recommendations. A smart undergrad should be able to read this REP and clearly understand how to approach profiling.

The following diagram shows the proposed methodology for benchmarking performance in ROS 2 which consists of 3 steps:

::

                                                                
                                                +--------------+
                    +----------------+  rebuild |              |
                    |                +---------->              |
  start  +----------> 1. trace graph |          | 2. benchmark +----------> 3. report
                    |                |          |              |
                    +----+------^--^-+          |              |
                         |      |  |            +-------+------+
                         |      |  |                    |
                         +------+  |                    |
                           LTTng   +--------------------+
                                       re-instrument

> 1. instrument both the target ROS 2 abstraction/application using `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_. Refer to `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ for tools, documentation and ROS 2 core layers tracepoints;

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
1. instrument the target ROS 2 abstraction/application using `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_. Refer to `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ for tools, documentation and ROS 2 core layers tracepoints;
```

2. trace and benchmark the ROS 2 application;
3. create performance reports with the results of the benchmarking.

Reference implementation and recommendations
============================================

The reader is referred to `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ and `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_ for the tools that enable a grey-boxed performance benchmarking approach in line with what the ROS 2 stack has been using (ROS 2 common packages come instrumented with LTTng probes). In addition, [3]_ and [4]_ present comprehensive descriptions of the `ros2_tracing <https://github.com/ros2/ros2_tracing>`_ tools and the `LTTng <https://lttng.org/>`_ infrastructure.

> Reference implementations complying with the recommendations of this REP can be found in literature for applications like perception and mapping [5]_, hardware acceleration [6]_ [7]_ or self-driving mobility [8]_. A particular example of interest for the reader is the instrumentation of the `image_pipeline <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/tree/humble/>`_ ROS 2 package [12]_, which is a set of nodes for processing image data in ROS 2. The `image_pipeline <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/tree/humble/>`_ package has been instrumented with LTTng probes available in the ROS 2 `Humble` release, which results in various perception Components (e.g. `RectifyNode <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/blob/ros2/image_proc/src/rectify.cpp#L82/>`_ *Component*) leveraging intrumentation which if enabled, can help trace the computational graph information flow of a ROS 2 application using such Component. The results of benchmarking the performance of `image_pipeline <https://github.com/ros-perception/image_pipeline/tree/humble/>`_ are available in [13]_ and launch scripts to both trace and analyze perception graphs available in [14]_.

Reviewer 10: I suggest we make this section more explicit via a bulleted list. E.g. "Here are reference implementations for particular application domains. Developers in these domains are encouraged to format their results in a similar style."
